Hello.
Welcome to God Day.
I'm Pastor Derek Walker of the Oxford Bible Church.
And today I've got hopefully an interesting title for you, which is The Two Essensions of Christ.
And maybe that might puzzle you because you probably are mostly aware of the Ascension of Christ that is described in Acts chapter 1.
Let's just have a look at that.
Luke, Acts is the continuation of Luke's Gospel and so he says in Acts 1, 1, the former account, that's Luke's Gospel, I made O Theophilus, of all Jesus began both to do and teach until the day in which he was taken up, taken up to heaven in the ascension, after he gave through the Holy Spirit commandments to the apostles whom he had chosen, to whom he also presented himself alive
after his suffering by many infallible proofs being seen by them during 40 days and speaking of the things pertaining to the kingdom of God.
So this is telling us that after Jesus rose from the dead, for a 40 day period, he actually appeared and trained his apostles for 40 days.
And then he was taken up to heaven.
And that is described in verse 9.
It says, when he had spoken these things, while they watched, he was taken up, and a cloud received him out of their sight.
And while they looked steadfastly towards heaven, behold two men,
stood by them in white apparel, I believe that's Moses and Elijah, who also said, men of Galilee, why do you stay stand gazing up into heaven?
This same Jesus who was taken up from you into heaven will so come in like manner as you saw him go into heaven.
So clearly this is his ascension into heaven.
And what I want to share with you, and not to be controversial, but
just to give you a more precise understanding of what Jesus did.
During these 40 days between His resurrection and His final ascension is to propose to you that in fact there were two ascensions of Christ.
The first ascension and really the most important ascension actually took place on the morning of His resurrection and then
This ascension in Acts 1 is his second ascension and the final ascension, as it were.
And that might be a surprise to you, but please keep an open mind.
And let's go now and look at his first ascension.
And we see that in John 20.
If we go to John 20, we have the stories in the Gospel of different groups of particularly women.
who go to the tomb early but it seems that in particular Mary Madeline is the one who gets there first and she gets there very soon after Jesus has risen from the dead and as she is at the tomb she discovers that the tomb is empty and she goes
and tells Peter and John and they run to the tomb and they find the tomb empty and then they go away again.
But meanwhile, Mary is lingering.
So whether this is seven eight o'clock in the morning, but Mary is lingering by the tomb, by herself, and then Jesus appears to her.
And she's the very first person who sees the risen Jesus.
And she talks to, and let's look to John 20 verse 16, Jesus said to her, Mary.
She turned and said to him, Raboni, which is to say, teacher.
And she realizes it's Jesus talking to her.
And then it's these words of Jesus in verse 17 that is so interesting.
Jesus said to her, do not cling to me, for I have not yet ascended to my father
But go to my brethren and say to them, I am ascending.
This is present tense.
Not I will ascend in 40 days, but I am ascending to my Father and to your Father and to my God and to your God."
Now, this is very significant, what he's saying is, there's a reason why she was not to touch him or cling to him.
because there was something he had to do first.
And we're going to see the four things that he did in this first ascension.
And the first thing is that he had to offer himself up to God as the first fruits offering from the dead.
And that was offering himself as a holy offering to God, and therefore it was inappropriate for Mary to touch him.
until he had accomplished that.
It's interesting that later that morning when other women come, it says in another gospel that they worshipped him and they clung to him.
They grabbed him by the feet and worshipped him.
And so this was after this initial ascension.
Then he allowed them to cling to him and later on we see when he appeared to the disciples.
He invited Thomas for examples, touch me, touch,
and see the wounds in my hand and put your fingers in there and you can check me out.
And so there was a reason why Mary couldn't do that because he had not done that ascend.
Notice that's the reason he gave.
He says, I have not yet ascended to my father.
And that can only make sense if he was actually going to ascend soon after this meeting with Mary.
He says, go to my brethren and say to them, I am ascending to my Father and your Father and my God and your God.
And there's another thing in here which is he is saying, I am bringing you into the same relationship.
He is establishing the new covenant.
What we're going to see in a minute too is that he had to take his blood into the heavenly holy of holies to
As it were seal and establish the new covenant in his blood, he isn't going to wait 40 days to do that.
He is going to do that now.
And that's why he says, you know, through this new covenant in my blood, God is my father, but he's also your father.
He's not just my God, but he's your God.
Why?
Because now you are my brethren, through the new covenant.
we become his brethren and this is going to be completed, this is going to be established through this final ascension.
He will represent us before God and he is letting them know that the new covenant from that moment, from that moment in the morning of the resurrection, the new covenant is established.
He didn't wait forty days to accomplish
these things.
So, this is where we know the first ascension took place on the morning of the resurrection.
So, let us talk about the four reasons why he couldn't have waited, four things that he had to do on the day of the resurrection, not forty days later.
First of all, he had to fulfill the Feast of First Roots.
Now, in the Passover week, and for this we need to go to Leviticus chapter 23.
because Jesus fulfilled Passover on the day of the cross.
But there was a first-fruits offering on the Sunday of that same Passover week.
And in the first-fruits offering, the first-fruits of the barley harvest were offered up to God.
And by God accepting that first-fruits offering, that guaranteed that the rest of the harvest would come in because God's blessing would then come on the whole harvest.
And Jesus were told in 1 Corinthians 15, 20 and 23, it says that Jesus is the fulfillment of the first-fruits offering.
So Jesus had to offer Himself as the first-fruits offering on that Sunday, on Resurrection Sunday.
He couldn't wait 40 days to do that.
And He had to be presented before God.
Now, the law of the first-fruits offering
is in Leviticus chapter 23, verse 9 to 11.
It says, the Lord spoke to Moses saying, speak to the children of Israel, say to them, when you come into the land which I give you and reap its harvest, then you will bring a sheath of the first roots of your harvest to the priest.
And he will wave the sheath before the Lord to be accepted on your behalf.
So this is the waving before the Lord.
Jesus had to be presented to God in heaven.
That required His ascension, you see, to be accepted on your behalf.
And Jesus, the resurrected man, was presented to the Father on our behalf.
And because He's perfectly righteous, He was accepted, you see, as our head.
And He was accepted on our behalf so that those of us who trust in Him are accepted through our union with Him.
He was accepted by the Father and we are accepted on our behalf, praise God.
And so he becomes the head of the church.
And then it says, on the day after the Sabbath, the priest shall wave it.
That's the Sunday.
It has to happen on the Sunday, Sunday morning.
And so Jesus, that's why he was ascending there around eight o'clock on that Sunday morning to fulfill the feast of firstfruits and the priest shall wave it.
before the Lord.
And you might say, well, that's a sheaf, not just a single person.
But there were others who were resurrected with Jesus who also were the first fruits from the dead.
You see, it's one thing that God could resurrect a perfect human being like Jesus.
But what about sinful human beings who put their trust in Him?
That's what we need to know is where the God has the power to resurrect us gloriously.
And so God
prove that by resurrecting a first root offering at the same time that he resurrected Jesus from the dead.
And that's in Matthew 27 verse 51.
It says that the veil at the cross, the veil of the temple was torn in two from top to bottom.
And then it jumps to the resurrection in verse 52.
Well, it says the earthquake and the rocks were split.
And then it says, and the graves were open.
Now this took place at the resurrection and many bodies of the saints who had fallen asleep were raised and coming out of the graves after his resurrection.
They went into the holy city and appeared to many.
So when Jesus was raised at dawn on Sunday, people who were believers who died recently under probably the time of Jesus ministry around Jerusalem
they were chosen to be the first fruits and they were resurrected and they had about an hour or two at the most to visit their friends and relatives and then when Jesus ascended he took them with him as the first fruits offering to God.
Hallelujah.
And so Jesus had to fulfill first fruits and that required his first ascension into heaven.
Now the second reason that's very clear
and really proves the point is the fact that when Jesus went ascended to heaven, he fulfilled the prophecy in Daniel chapter 7.
Daniel chapter 7 verse 13 and 14, hopefully I can find it quickly, Daniel 7 verse 13 and 14
is a prophecy of the Messiah who's called the Son of Man.
And what that means is when it talks about Daniel describing him as the Son of Man, this is someone who has lived a human life and now it appears before God in heaven.
And this was fulfilled at the ascension.
Daniel 7, 13, I was watching in the night visions and behold, one like the Son of man.
Of course, this is Jesus.
Coming with the clouds of heaven is coming before the Father.
He came to the ancient of days, the Father, and they brought him near before him.
Then to him was given dominion and glory and a kingdom.
Then all nations, peoples, nations, languages should serve him.
His dominion is an everlasting dominion which shall not pass away.
And his kingdom, the one which shall not be destroyed.
Notice, this was fulfilled at his resurrection.
This is Jesus ascending into heaven and receiving all authority in heaven and earth.
He was given dominion and glory.
This was his coronation.
He was crowned as the king, the one with the right to rule, praise God.
And this is the prophesied by Daniel.
Now, the key verse, I suppose, would be Matthew 28, 18, where Jesus, during the 40 days, appeared to his disciples in Matthew 28, and he said to them as his introductory words, for giving the great commission,
He said, all authority has been given to me in heaven and earth.
So in other words, this occasion where he receives all authority did not take place at the end of the 40 days because then Jesus would say, in a few days time, all authority is going to be given to me.
He didn't.
He said, it's already been given to him.
Why?
Because he ascended on the morning of the resurrection to heaven
And not only did he present himself as the first fruits to God, he received all authority in heaven and earth.
Praise God.
And this is confirmed, of course, in also in Philippians chapter two, verse eight to 11, it says that because he humbled himself unto death, even death on the cross, it says, therefore, God has highly exalted him.
That's his resurrection and ascension
and given him the name above every name, that at the name of Jesus, every knee wore bow.
You see, that's him being given all authority in heaven and earth.
You see, that is his exaltation.
And that actually took place on the day of his resurrection.
And this is also proved from Ephesians chapter one, the end of Ephesians chapter one, which goes, describes the power of God,
that raised him from the dead.
And it says that we would have a revelation, Ephesians 119 of the exceeding greatness of his power toward us who believe according to the working of his mighty power, which he worked in Christ when he raised him from the dead.
So we're talking about the resurrection.
And then he goes immediately on and says, and seated him at his right hand in the heavenly places.
In other words, he's talking about the power released.
at his resurrection and his ascension and there's no hint of a forty-day interval between those two parts of that verse.
The natural reading is that the power of God raised him from the dead and then seated him at God's right hand at the heavenly places far above all principalities and power and might and dominion and every name that's named not only in this age but also in that which is to come and he has put all things under his feet.
Praise God.
And so, again, it relates his ascension and his resurrection.
It connects them together in a very close way because his first ascension took place at the time of his resurrection.
Okay, and 1 Peter 3 is another verse that does the same thing.
1 Peter 3 verse 21 finishes
At the end of that verse, it talks about through the resurrection of Jesus Christ.
And then it goes on and says, who?
Verse 22, 1 Peter 3, 22, who has gone into heaven and is at the right hand of God?
Angels and authorities and powers having been made subject to him.
So this happened at his resurrection.
Soon after his resurrection, he received the first ascension when he received all authority.
And then he told his disciples a few days later that he had received all authority, you see.
So that didn't happen at the end of the 40 days.
The ascension after 40 days was as very much a secondary one where he then sat down for the church age.
Now there's a third thing that Jesus had to do that required his first ascension
And that is he had to take the blood of the new covenant into heaven to, as it were, seal the New Testament.
And we read about that in Hebrews chapter 9.
Let's look at that.
Hebrews 9 verse 11.
It says, but Christ came as the high priest of good things to come with the greater and more perfect tabernacle, not made with hands.
That is not of this creation.
He's talking about the heavenly temple, basically.
Not with the blood of goats and calves, but with his own blood.
He entered the most holy place in heaven once for all.
So he took his own blood into the most holy place, the heavenly holy of holies, the throne room of God, basically.
Once
for all, having obtained eternal redemption, for if the blood of bulls and goats, and so it goes on.
So notice, did Jesus wait 40 days before he did that?
That does not make sense.
And if that was the case, he couldn't say to Mary Madeline what he said, because he is saying, I'm sealing the deal right now.
He had
established the new covenant in his blood, but the completion of that was when he presented himself to the Father as the first roots to be accepted on our behalf and bringing his blood into the heavenly holy of Holies.
And then as a result of that, we are his brethren.
He is our God, praise God, and we come into that wonderful new relationship with God through the new covenant.
So he isn't going to wait 40 days before he is going to present his blood in the heavenly holy of holies.
That had to take place on the day of his resurrection.
He wouldn't delay doing something like that.
And then there is a fourth thing that he had to accomplish.
And only if you understand these things, can you harmonize all these scriptures together, you see?
And this one concerns the Holy Spirit.
Jesus said,
Proment said to his disciples that when I go away, I will receive the Holy Spirit from my Father and I will give him to you.
Okay, so we understand that.
And then Acts 2, for example, in the day of Pentecost, Peter talked about what Jesus did in regards to the Holy Spirit.
And of course, the Holy Spirit moved in the Old Testament.
but there is a special ministry of the Holy Spirit in the New Testament that was not available in the Old Testament, particularly the indwelling Spirit, the Holy Spirit, by which we are born, made to be born again, and then He indwells us.
And that was only made possible through the New Testament.
Now, in Acts chapter 2, verse 32, He says,
Therefore, and he's really saying, look, the outpouring of the Holy Spirit on the day of Pentecost proves that Jesus is the Messiah because he has been exalted to the right hand of God and received the Holy Spirit and poured out the Holy Spirit.
And that proves that he is risen from the dead and he's exalted.
But notice what he says here.
This Jesus, X232, this Jesus, God has raised up
of which we are all witnesses.
Therefore, being exalted to the right hand of God and having received from the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, He has poured out this which you now see and hear.
So again, the idea is that as a result of the exaltation of the ascension of Christ, that the Holy Spirit is made available.
Now of course, this happened in two stages.
And the outpouring on the day of Pentecost was the second stage.
So to complete the picture, we need to go back to John 20.
Remember, John 20 takes place on the day of the resurrection.
And in John 20, we already read the verses that describe the first ascension.
Mary Madeline was told by Jesus.
I am ascending.
Right now, he says, I am ascending to my Father and your Father to my God and to your God.
He says, don't cling to me until I have done this holy ministry in my ascension.
And then a few verses later on the very same day, that evening, Jesus appears to the apostles.
In verse 21, just a few verses later, that same day, remember, Jesus, it says in verse 22, and when he had said this, he breathed on them and said to them, receive the Holy Spirit.
So remember, when did Jesus receive the promise of the Spirit from the Father, the new covenant promise of the Spirit from the Father, it was when he is
exalted on high when he is ascended.
And now he is giving the Holy Spirit.
In fact, it says he breathes on them and says receive the Holy Spirit.
So Jesus is imparting the Holy Spirit to his disciples on the evening of the resurrection.
That's when they were born again.
It's the same picture as when God breathed into Adam at the beginning.
In the first creation, and he's saying now,
you are becoming new creations because I breathe my spirit into you.
So the fact that Jesus was giving the Holy Spirit to his disciples on the evening of the day of the resurrection means he must have already ascended earlier that day into heaven and received the promise of the Holy Spirit from the Father and he was giving it to his disciples and that's when they were born again.
And then he said to them,
There's a second part to this blessing of the Holy Spirit, and you need to wait in Jerusalem until you receive the power when the Holy Spirit comes upon you.
So they received the Spirit within them, and on the day of Pentecost, and it had to wait till that feast, I think, to fulfill that feast that they received the Spirit upon them, which was power.
to be a witness.
And so, the blessing of the Spirit, and that's a different teaching, but the blessing of the Spirit is in two parts, the Spirit within and the Spirit upon.
But my point is simply this, that for Jesus to give the Holy Spirit to His disciples on the evening of the day of the resurrection meant that He had to go and be as sent to heaven, exactly when He told Mary Madeline, He was ascending to heaven.
to receive the Holy Spirit to give to His disciples.
And so there are four reasons why Jesus had to ascend on the morning of the resurrection to fulfill the Feast of First Roots, to present Himself and the others before God in heaven.
He had to go into heaven to receive all authority in heaven on earth.
And the thirdly, He had to take His blood and
bring it into the heavenly holy of holies to establish the new covenant in his blood.
And fourthly, he had to receive from the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit so that he could give it to his disciples.
All of that happened on the day of the resurrection, not 40 days later.
So I hope that that helps you fit the scriptures together in a new and exciting way.
God bless you.